in view of the report released today by
the
equalities and human rights commission
which identified
serious failings by the labour party in
dealing with anti-semitic racism
should just one individual be held to
account
chris well it's a damning report it
finds labour party acted unlawfully
it finds that jeremy corbyn's office
effectively covered up
23 different allegations of
anti-semitism
but i think it goes beyond just jeremy
corbyn i think kia stammer has questions
to answer himself
because for five years kia starmer sat
on the labour front bench
and said nothing while this was going on
i didn't hear him uh condemning this
activity i didn't hear him holding
jeremy corbyn to account
unlike many other labour mps and many
labour front ventures he didn't resign
from that front bench
he said nothing he defended jeremy
corbyn and indeed he promoted jeremy
corbyn
as a potential prime minister less than
a year
ago so i think kirsten needs to do two
things if he's serious about fixing this
firstly he should apologize personally
for his failure
to speak out on this issue when he was
on the front bench because it was all
very convenient for him to sit there and
stay quiet
in the hope that he would then take over
his leader rather cynical i think and
secondly
he needs to not just suspend jeremy
corbyn he should kick jeremy corbyn
out of the labour party because this
report is so damning
and jeremy corbyn's response to it this
morning
saying the whole thing had been hugely
exaggerated for political purposes
uh was disgraceful so i think kirsten
needs to do those two things
if he is really serious about fixing
this issue
and just to be very precise about the uh
report the equality human rights
commission report it found political
interference and anti-semitism
complaints rather than didn't use the
word cover-up but political interference
nonetheless
nick this is not a comfortable day for
you i imagine
you also were part of the front bench
during all this
what do you have to say well firstly
this is a shameful day for the labour
party
accept the findings of the equality and
human rights
report in their entirety and we will act
on the recommendations but first and
foremost i want to acknowledge
the hurt that has been caused to the
jewish community
over the past five years kia stammer has
expressed
our profound sorrow for this we are
profoundly sorry
for that hurt that has been caused and
today's report it's an appalling damning
report that is before us
but we now have to act upon the
recommendations of that report
i never thought i'd be sitting on your
show fiona after the last labour
government
created the equality and human rights
commission and actually be speaking
about an investigation and findings into
the labour party itself
but that's where we are we will now work
to ensure that yes our complaints
processes are
improved that they are independent they
are where they should be but we will do
more than that
the answer to this isn't just about
process
important though that is it's about
changing the culture of our party so it
is a place
where everybody feels welcome and
everybody feels safe
and what kia stammer has done today with
a
decisive speech of moral clarity
is to show the way towards that i know
there is a long way to go
the key is speech and our commitment to
taking action on this
is the start of that road well talking
of moral clarity
one of the things that upset many in the
jewish
community is one way of describing it is
labour's refusal to accept
except in full the international
holocaust remembrance alliance's
definition of anti-semitism that was in
now you endorsed that decision not to
accept it
you went out on the airwaves defending
the decision not to accept it
labour changed its position just two
months later
i don't think that's a fair
characterization of what i said that day
what i said that day was that
the abuse that was being referred to the
appalling anti-semitic abuse
whatever was in the rulebook was
absolutely wrong and had to be dealt
with
and i also said that the nec was right
to look again at the decision they've
made
not to adopt all of the uh examples that
went with the definition
but you didn't accept all those examples
nick you you didn't accept all those
examples and you went out and today
programme and other things
out on the airwaves explaining that
labour should not accept all those
examples
as part of that definition no no that
that's an unfair characterization
of what i said in the interview with
respect for you and what i said was
that the nec were right to look at it
again because they of the decision that
they'd made they had to look at it again
they did look at it again
and then they made the right decision
but look i
will speak about the fact that i raised
the issue of anti-semitism
with members of the shadow cabinet i
wasn't in the shadow cabinet i also when
i was out on the media
said that more action had to be taken on
anti-semitism
kia stammer spoke in the shadow cabinet
about it he spoke it on the media about
it but the reality is this
we all have to accept today the failure
of collective
leadership that is what that report
makes absolutely clear i'm not shying
away from it
i accept every dot and comma of that
report
and what i would say today is over the
period that i've been shadow home
secretary we are
under this new leadership of kiyostama
we've made
tackling anti-semitism a very top
priority
what i've always asked is to be judged
on
actions not words i see today as the
start of that and kia stammer
showing this morning through that speech
what we are now going to do
what we will now do to try to ensure
that this scourge of anti-semitism
is driven out of our party and it is a
safe and welcoming place which is the
labour party that i want to see
had five years to take action and in
those five years in the shadow cabinet
supporting jeremy corbyn
he did nothing i think he should
apologize for that can i
what can i just say um
i want to talk about trauma because
sometimes politicians talk about issues
and they talk about things that i call a
cold and they don't talk about things
that are hot
and one of those is trauma um i was for
i'm a former deputy chair of the british
museum
and i was invited back there about a
year and a half ago by the director to
create a project around
reclamation and we decided to look at
african enslavement and enslavement of
people
of african ancestry
and to look at trauma of the trauma
that a people can hold inside of
themselves
even if you didn't experience it
yourself
it's handed down by generation through
generation
through generation through generation
and it's real
and for me if a black person tells me
they're not safe
they don't feel safe in an environment
that it feels racist that it is racist
i listen we have to listen because of
that trauma of enslavement
and i'm going to say the same thing
about the jewish people
if jewish people tell you some place is
unsafe for them
they don't feel good it feels bad
they're holding trauma and we have to
understand that
we have to begin to talk about that
people may think it's trivial or it
didn't exist
or it doesn't mean anything but the
holocaust
was the greatest crime of the 20th
century and we need to
teach it in the schools and we need to
understand it at
every level that it exists just as we
need to understand the transatlantic
slave trade
and its impact on people of african
descent today
we need to understand the holocaust
and what it means to jewish people into
jews and
those of us who aren't jews and for the
labor party
i i i can't even express how i feel
that the labor party is caught up in
this i'm a labor voter
i will always vote labor i became a
citizen so that i could vote
labor i will always vote for the labor
party because i think it's the best
coalition of the left
for this country but for this party to
be caught up in something like this
makes me sick and i i don't want to hear
it
i don't want to hear all the other stuff
it needed to be dealt with
immediately at the top with immediate
due diligence
now whether jeremy is an anti-semite or
what
how would i know that i don't he doesn't
look like he doesn't seem like one to me
but how would i know the people who know
are the people who feel it and that's
who should be listened to murray
it's been an incredibly painful day it's
a damning
incitement of labour this is really
serious
the ehrc report has found that the
labour party has committed
unlawful acts of harassment and
victimization
against jewish people it doesn't get any
worse than that does it
and we felt during this time people were
making allegations that
raising this as bonnie said were were
smears
some kind of deliberate action and the
jewish community
we didn't want this fight but we had to
stand up we had to say this was wrong
we were proud to do that and today is a
damning indictment as i've said
and what's happened during the course
of the last few years is that
anti-semitism
was on the fringes of society and it's
been brought straight into mainstream
politics
into the political party jeremy corbyn
and his leadership
made a political decision to ignore
not to tackle anti-semitism
that is so so appalling it's not
imaginable
in this day and age the leadership
did nothing about it and here we are
today
talking all these years later when this
could have been
resolved and not only did the leadership
of the party
not do anything about it we've now got
findings of
interference political interference by
the leader's office
it doesn't get much worse than that does
it
and and marie can i ask you because i
mean jeremy corbyn has
said again today that he is not
anti-semitic that anyone who says there
was not a problem with anti-semitism and
labor is wrong
but the question from david is should
just one individual be held to account
it's a question also of the culture in
the party
the problem with anti-semitism runs deep
this is going to be the beginning of a
very long journey
it's all very well the labour party
saying sorry and kierstama did give
an apology on the day he was elected but
what's important here
is that we see action words are
only so much we need to see that the
action plan
is implemented by the 10th of december
and there need to be key changes
across the party we need an independent
disciplinary process
education and to tackle that culture
and this is going to be something that's
not going to change
overnight there's a lot of pain and a
lot of hurt
it's not one person's fault but jeremy
corbyn allowed the space for
anti-semites to come into the party
and the leadership did absolutely
nothing about it let's hear from our
audience
uh jane p i like everybody's been
horrified by this story as it's
unfolding over the years
and um we've heard today that the labour
party are legally accountable
but really they are an entity
and surely there must be some individual
people
held accountable are there any legal
addresses
that will ensure that the people behind
this
really um are accountable it's one thing
being
expelled from your political party but
to me
that isn't enough um for what
for the situation that's happening to
drag
um hate crime into politics is a pretty
serious thing
and so against the british way of life
paula hello thank you fiona i want to
come back
on nick's point where he said that don't
judge by words but judged by actions
prejudice is often displayed through
words so words do
matter and i want to come back to chris
because he's
very quickly gone in and criticized kier
stama but i would remind him that the
conservative party has also been accused
of racism
um against people of islamic faith so
when can we look forward to an
investigation into their practices
and see some apologies and of course
some criticism from the top there too
yes chris we're still waiting for report
from the conservative party
into prejudice it was announced uh last
year
when are we going to see that well that
report is underway it's independent it's
being conducted by a former commissioner
from the echo and when well
is asking when will we see it well the
work is underway i can't give you a date
uh tonight but the work is underway it's
been almost like
i would point out there is only one
political party in history
that has been investigated by the
equality and human rights commission
that is the labour party
on this anti-semitism issue i would also
point to the fact that the conservatives
have appointed one the most diverse
government in british history we're the
first party
to have appointed an ethnic minority
chancellor of the exchequer and the
second ethnic minority chancellor of the
extracurricular
we were the first party to appoint an
ethnic minority home secretary
and the second ethnic minority host so
we have appointed the most diverse
cabinet as a as a symbol of our
commitment to this important issue
chris that's what they used to say to
folks when they were desegregating
uh uh neighborhoods oh well we have a
black person here
uh you know in our neighborhood so we're
cool we're all right that doesn't wash
anymore okay
you don't judge people like that anymore
we look at human beings
the the baroness varsity has been on you
not you personally but on the the
conservative party her party
for years about this this does not
excuse or wash over the labor party i'm
not doing that
but there is housework you need to be
doing too
and putting people of color in the
cabinet does not erase that fact
can i can i can i just yes dude go ahead
because then i must bring anthony
absolutely um i just want to say look
the tories do do need to acknowledge
there is there is a problem with
islamophobia in the tory party and they
do acknowledge they need to do something
about it
the board of deputies did input into the
singh report but you've got to look at
scale here
the bnp have also been investigated by
the ehrc
but so many people in the labour party
have been investigated
you're not seeing from the conservative
party mps fleeing
from the party like luciana berger a
pregnant woman at the
bacarti conference she even had to have
security
uh louise allman she had to flee the
party after 55 years
so you're not seeing the same level of
scale even though there are
problems that have to be addressed in
the conservative party
and auntie let me bring you in here i
mean how is this looking
to you on the other side of the atlantic
well i'm going to light a novena candle
and say thank god i'm not involved in
british politics i've got my own
problems on this side of the pond but
but but here's what i would say and i
mean this very respectfully to chris
and because i i i'm relating to what
bonnie is saying about tokenism
and i think what we find in our
societies
that we have to break down the systemic
and institutional racism
and so if the races think you're a
racist well guess why you're a racist
and if the
you know the anti-semites that you're an
anti-semite you're likely an anti-semite
even if you're not doing it
intentionally
there are systemic and institutional
biases and i think the point that
bonnie's making which i'd like to hammer
is that uh you can't say well you know
one of my best friends is black
therefore i'm not a racist i mean you
just can't do that okay
it's it's it's tokenism what we have to
do is what dr martin luther king jr
said a long time ago is judge each other
by the
content of our character not the color
of our skin and by the way
i grew up in a very patriarchal
italian-american
immigrant family and so you know
you're also biased by the way you grow
up and it's it's important for you
to seek that enlightenment and to make
that transformation
and we need to do it as a culture and a
civilization it has to be
at the institutional level so it's it's
got to be at the labor level
and at the conservative level frankly
but these appointments i mentioned
earlier they're not they're not
tokenistic right the people
i'm talking about who are my friends
like they're chris
chris hang on let me let me let me
finish the video it's important
it's important it's important chris
because it's important for you
because you're a good guy isn't what
andy is saying to you when i'm saying
this part of you take it in
it doesn't matter okay what matters is
what you
do and that's what we're saying it
doesn't matter that you've got a black
and brown cap it doesn't matter
and that's what people are in the
streets are about now it doesn't matter
it's what you do and if you pursue
policies
and you stay the same way you could have
whatever
it don't matter and that's what i'm
trying to say to you
that's what i'm trying to say it's
important for you to get it inside and
by the way she means it respectfully too
i just want to entertain i don't know if
i do she means it very respectfully
she's trying to
yeah she's giving you the benefit of
that you're not racist she's just trying
to tell you that you're in a systematic
web well that's the south side i
sometimes
see things the way mine already see them
well the point i was making is that the
you know my colleagues in government are
not there for reasons of tokenism
they're there because they're incredibly
talented
energetic hard workers can't hear
anything dynamic people
and of course i understand we've got to
dismantle any barriers
to anyone achieving their potential
because as in the words of martin luther
king jr that anthony quoted a minute ago
what matters is the content of someone's
character their ability their talent
uh we should be unfettered people should
be able to i never use the word token
you did don't use it twice i never said
tokyo
he did someone did he wasn't me i know i
think today we should concentrate a bit
more on
the labour party anti-semitism because
when you look at what jeremy corbyn did
this morning in his speech
he totally uh tried to say that it
wasn't it wasn't so
important he even tried to suggest he'd
he'd made improvements and he's someone
that's got to accept responsibility
and i think the lessons from the labour
party are what we should be really
focusing on today
let's hear a bit more from our audience
lots of hands up donna just going back
to the
um the culture of the labour party i
think since the appointment
of kia stammer i think he really has
stamped a clear message
regarding it okay yes we can't turn back
what's
happened but hopefully with a
with a the message he sent out with
obviously the dismissal of rebecca long
bailey early doors
i think that sends hopefully a clearer
message going forward
alex um as a young person has been
brought up being taught about the
horrors
of the holocaust and i feel like it's
absolutely ludicrous
that things like this are still
happening in today's politics and the
people need to be held
accountable for it i agree absolutely
you don't expect anti-semitism in the
opposition party it's it's unimaginable
let alone being found
guilty of victimization and harassment
miles
good evening um i think it's it's a
terrible shame to see
what they did but as mps how are we
going to change that in the future so
that there is no hate crime
in any political party anywhere and that
anybody who does
work for the government who wants to
become a member of parliament they know
that they are safe
where they're working so let's have a
final word for you i mean what the
one question from jane was about is any
legal action going to be taken against
anyone
in the labour party and and how do you
how are you going to change the culture
within the party from here on
here on in well firstly i mean since
kiyostama became the leader we've had
uh yeah i think it's nearly up to around
about 300 cases dealt with in our
complaints
system now that's just to give a sense
that's
more than in the whole of 2019 so
clearly kia has been trying to make
progress
on individuals being held to account
since he became leader
but jane was asking very specifically is
there any prospect of legal action being
taken against anyone in the party given
the report that came out today
well look i i can't comment on whether
individuals want to
take legal action around particular bits
of the report but obviously
number one i say that we will of course
be holding people to
account that's why we're going to
improve our complaint system and marie
asked me
you know very fairly about how we will
do that going forward
we have to put an action plan together
now by the 10th of december
we will be reaching out and marie knows
this to the board of deputies to the
jewish
uh labor movement to the wider jewish
community as we do that
to ensure that we do have a system that
there is no political interference that
is properly resourced that people are
properly trained
that is transparent that you know has
proper rules about what sanctions are
appropriate or everyone can have
confidence in that
but there is as i say a wider question
here that process
is vitally important and we will put it
in place
but there's a fair challenge too about
changing the culture and we change the
culture
through leadership we change it through
leadership by what kia stammer
has been saying and doing over the past
six months i mean one of the reasons i
backed here for leader was those
conversations i had with him
about his determination to tackle this
issue
he set that out made that apology in his
his acceptance speech back in april
and he's been putting that into action
since and it's that leadership
is going to be vital to bring about that
cultural change we need
maria is absolutely right to say that
isn't going to happen overnight
but we are determined to make that
happen and to work at it
you